Obtaining a shell on Yamaha Montage
===================================

Yamaha Montage firmware updates consist of an ext2 filesystem image which is
loopback-mounted from a file 8N70OS_.PGM on an attached USB drive when the
machine powers up with the Utility and Cursor Up buttons held.

The initramfs /init script detects the magic button combination, mounts the
USB drive and filesystem image, then runs update.sh from within that image.
(The name 'update.sh' is misleading: it is actually exec()ed rather than run
with a shell, so needs execute permissions and #! magic.)

Real firmware updates overwrite the partitions on /dev/mmcblk0 with new
images, but the included update.sh script instead uses this mechanism to
non-destructively launch a shell on the Montage.

A Makefile is provided to build update.sh into a suitable ext2 filesystem.
This requires mke2fs and debugfs from e2fsprogs, but does not need root
privileges or a Linux host as the filesystem image is not mounted.

Run 'make' to build 8N70OS_.PGM, which should be copied to the root of a
FAT32-formatted USB drive. Connect this to the Montage, hold Utility and
Cursor Up, then turn on the instrument. A prompt will appear on the
touchscreen and you can plug in a USB keyboard to interact with it.

Before launching the shell, the instrument's main / and /home filesystems
are mounted read-only on /mnt/root and /mnt/home respectively. In normal
operation, Montage uses /home/ngs to store user data and configuration, and
preset data can be found in /usr/share/yamaha. The front-end itself is
started by the /usr/bin/daisy-start script.

The FAT32 boot filesystem is left unmounted as damaging this will brick the
instrument in a way that will require JTAG and cannot be fixed with the
standard update process.


fix-presets
-----------

Yamaha gives the first part of Montage preset performances the same name as
the whole performance, but subsequent parts use their instrument category in
upper-case as name. It is cleaner and more useful to rename these after the
performance too. No information is lost as each part already includes a
separate instrument category field.

fix-presets fixes all the active part names in presets to match the name of
the performance. This also corrects a handful of presets which were renamed
or corrected before release, but whose part names weren't updated in line.

This script takes around four minutes to update all the presets, reporting
its progress as it runs. /mnt/root must be mounted read-write beforehand,
then mounted read-only again afterwards to cleanly sync the filesystem:

  mount -o remount,rw /mnt/root
  fix-presets
  mount -o remount,ro /mnt/root

It will refuse to run unless the firmware version is exactly 3.51.0. The
binary file format changes between releases so byte offsets will need to be
verified and updated for future versions.


fix-cfxstage
------------

CFX Stage is a well-executed reduction of the full four-part CFX Concert
preset into a single part. Some stray common-level control assignments
(presumably left over from CFX Concert) have been left pointing into the now
empty parts two and three. These have no effect on CFX Stage itself, but can
be a nuisance when additional parts are later added in by the user.

fix-cfxstage removes these stray assignments from the CFX Stage preset.
/mnt/root must be mounted read-write beforehand, then mounted read-only
again afterwards to cleanly sync the filesystem:

  mount -o remount,rw /mnt/root
  fix-cfxstage
  mount -o remount,ro /mnt/root

It will refuse to run unless the firmware version is exactly 3.51.0.


fix-cfxstudio
-------------

CFX PopStudioGrand is the original reduction of CFX Concert into a single
part piano. It has a lot of rough edges, including harshly discontinuous
timbre between G5 and G#5 and a misprogrammed half-damper time which leads
to an unnaturally sudden amplitude drop when half-pedalling.

fix-cfxstudio completely replaces this preset with CFX Studio, a variant of
CFX Stage modified to be easy to drop into multi-instrument performances. It
has simplified controller assignments to avoid awkward interactions with the
rest of a performance, and does not use the variation effect as part of a
compound reverb, but is otherwise identical to CFX Stage.

/mnt/root must be mounted read-write beforehand, then mounted read-only
again afterwards to cleanly sync the filesystem:

  mount -o remount,rw /mnt/root
  fix-cfxstudio
  mount -o remount,ro /mnt/root

It will refuse to run unless the firmware version is exactly 3.51.0.


Disclaimer
----------

Remember that if your synthesiser bursts into flames and kills your family
pet as a result of experiments or modifications gone wrong, you are unlikely
to elicit much sympathy from Yamaha. I make no warranty and disclaim all
liability for any damage caused by your use of this code, which I hereby
dedicate to the public domain.

Please report any problems or bugs to Chris Webb <chris@arachsys.com>.
