# [Yamaha Montage](/montage/) â‰« Top-level file structure

Montage X7U, X7L and X7A files all have an identical structure, but dump
different subsets of the internal storage. In particular, to load an X7L
file into the user bank, just rename the file with an X7U extension.
Similarly, to load an X7U file into a library slot, just rename it with an
X7L extension.

MODX X8U, X8L and X8A files also have the structure described in this
document, apart from the different extension and file version in the header.
The detailed content of some of the data blocks may differ, however.

Unless otherwise specified, in what follows all indices are zero-based, all
sizes, lengths and offsets are bytes, and integers are in big-endian order.
Montage lacks an RTC, so to allow lists to be date-sorted, it uses an
arbitrary 32-bit incrementing counter as a proxy for time stamps.

The "Full Tines 2" preset may be useful if the eccentric, ad-hoc design of
these binary files induces unexpected 1980s flashbacks.


## Header

The file header looks like:

```
0x00  59 41 4d 41 48 41 2d 59  53 46 43 00 00 00 00 00  |YAMAHA-YSFC.....|
0x10  34 2e 30 2e 35 00 00 00  00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00  |4.0.5...........|
0x20  nn nn nn nn ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0x30  ll ll ll ll ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff tt tt tt tt  |................|
```

File version "`4.0.5`" is current for Montage firmware v3.00 to v3.51. File
version "`5.0.1`" is used by MODX firmware v2.00 to v2.52.

_n_ is the size of the catalogue which follows the header, _l_ is the size
of the library info immediately after the catalogue, and _t_ - 1 is the most
recent time stamp on an item in the file.


## Catalogue

Top-level blocks of data within these files are identified by four letter
chunk IDs, for instance "`EPFM`" or "`DPFM`". The catalogue consists of
eight byte entries, each being the four byte identifier followed by the
32-bit offset of that block within the file.

Here is an example catalogue from an empty X7L file:

```
0x40  45 50 46 4d 00 00 00 f1  44 50 46 4d 00 00 00 fd  |EPFM....DPFM....|
0x50  45 57 46 4d 00 00 01 09  44 57 46 4d 00 00 01 15  |EWFM....DWFM....|
0x60  45 57 49 4d 00 00 01 21  44 57 49 4d 00 00 01 2d  |EWIM...!DWIM...-|
0x70  45 41 52 50 00 00 01 39  44 41 52 50 00 00 01 45  |EARP...9DARP...E|
0x80  45 43 52 56 00 00 01 51  44 43 52 56 00 00 01 5d  |ECRV...QDCRV...]|
0x90  45 4c 53 54 00 00 01 69  44 4c 53 54 00 00 01 75  |ELST...iDLST...u|
```


## Library info

Following the catalogue and before the first block, there is an area with a
source filename and other info for each of the populated library slots. In
the simple case where all library slots are empty, it consists of 80 `0xff`
bytes followed by a single `0x00` byte, this length of 81 being declared in
the file header:

```
0xa0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0xb0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0xc0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0xd0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0xe0  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  ff ff ff ff ff ff ff ff  |................|
0xf0  00                                                |.|
```

A self-contained X7U or X7L won't refer to waveforms, arpeggios or curves
from other libraries, so the library info can be left empty like this for
such files.

However, more generally an X7A or X7U file records info for every library
installed on the instrument when it was saved. The initial 80 bytes comprise
eight chunks of 10 bytes, one for each library slot. If a slot is occupied,
the chunk will be `00 ii 01 ii 02 ii 03 ii 04 ii` where _i_ ranges from
`0x02` to `0x09` for slots 1 to 8. Otherwise there are just 10 `0xff` bytes.

Following this, there is a single byte count _n_ of occupied slots(`0x00` to
`0x08`) followed by _n_ variable-length descriptions of each occupied slot
with the following format:

  - 1 byte slot number: `0x02` to `0x09`
  - zero-terminated library name
  - 32-bit size of performance favourite flags (always 640)
  - 640 bytes performance favourite flags (`0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set)
  - 32-bit size of arpeggio favourite flags (always 256)
  - 256 bytes arpeggio favourite flags (`0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set)
  - 32-bit size of waveform favourite flags (always 1024)
  - 1024 bytes waveform favourite flags (`0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set)
  - 1 byte `0xff` (apparently fixed)
  - 32-bit size of included non-waveform data in bytes
  - 32-bit size of included waveform data in bytes
  - 32-bit time stamp of library entries (reset at load-time)
  - 1 byte `0x00` (apparently fixed)

The sizes of waveform and non-waveform data are used in the _Utility ->
Contents -> Data Utility_ display, but the exact rule to calculate these
from the file contents is not yet documented here.


## Blocks

After the catalogue and padding, the blocks listed in the catalogue follow
one by one until the end of the file. Each block has the following format:

  - `0x00`: 4 bytes identifier, e.g. "`EPFM`"
  - `0x04`: 32-bit remaining length of the block (_n_ + 4)
  - `0x08`: 32-bit count of `Entr` or `Data` items in the block (_k_)
  - `0x0c`: _n_ byte payload of _k_ `Entr` or `Data` chunks

There are two types of blocks, present in matching pairs. An _entry list_
has type beginning with 'E', e.g. "`EPFM`", and its corresponding _data
block_ has a type beginning with 'D', e.g. "`DPFM`". The 'E' block should
preceed the 'D' block in the file; order doesn't seem to matter otherwise.


## Entry lists ("Exxx")

Following the 12-byte block header, an entry list concatenates zero or more
entries of the form:

  - `0x00`: 4 bytes magic "`Entr`"
  - `0x04`: 32-bit length of this entry excluding these first 8 bytes
  - `0x08`: 32-bit size of the item corresponding to this entry
  - `0x0c`: 32-bit offset of the item chunk within the data block
  - `0x10`: 32-bit program number --- type specific
  - `0x14`: 6 bytes of flags --- type specific
  - `0x1a`: 32-bit time stamp for date-ordering
  - `0x1e`: zero-terminated item name
  - `0x??`: zero-terminated title --- type specific, only non-empty for `EPFM`
  - `0x??`: optional additional data --- type specific, only used by `EPFM`

The number of entries must match the count described in the entry list
header and the number of items in the corresponding data block.

Program numbers generally have a bank number (`0x0001` = User, `0x0002` =
Library 1, `0x0003` = Library 2, ..., `0x0009` = Library 8) in the
most-significant 16-bits, followed by a zero-indexed item number in the
least-significant 16-bits. Some exceptions to this are described below.


## Data blocks ("Dxxx")

Following the 12-byte block header, a data block concatenates zero or more
item chunks of the form:

  - `0x00`: 4 bytes magic "`Data`"
  - `0x04`: 32-bit size of this item (_n_)
  - `0x08`: _n_ bytes of data for this item

The number of items must match the count described in the block header, and
_n_ must match the item size stored in the entry list for this item.


## Block types

Listed in the order used by the instrument, which first saves all non-empty
entry lists "`Exxx`", then the data blocks "`Dxxx`":

  - `EPFM`, `DPFM` --- performances
  - `EWFM`, `DWFM` --- waveform metadata
  - `EARP`, `DARP` --- arpeggios
  - `EMSQ`, `DMSQ` --- motion sequences
  - `ELST`, `DLST` --- live sets
  - `ECRV`, `DCRV` --- curves
  - `EMTN`, `DMTN` --- microtunings
  - `EPTN`, `DPTN` --- user auditions
  - `EPAT`, `DPAT` --- patterns
  - `ESNG`, `DSNG` --- songs
  - `ESYS`, `DSYS` --- system settings
  - `EFVT`, `DFVT` --- favourites
  - `EPCH`, `DPCH` --- pattern chains
  - `EWIM`, `DWIM` --- wave data


## Performances ("EPFM")

Performances are numbered to match their MIDI number: `0x00xxyyzz`
corresponds to bank MSB _x_, bank LSB _y_ and program _z_. Note this means
_x_, _y_ and _z_ range from `0x00` to `0x7f`, not `0xff`. For reference, the
following ranges are used:

  - `0x3f0000` -- `0x3f1f7f` --- preset performances
  - `0x3f2000` -- `0x3f247f` --- user performances
  - `0x3f2800` -- `0x3f2c7f` --- library 1 performances
  - `0x3f2d00` -- `0x3f317f` --- library 2 performances
  - `0x3f3200` -- `0x3f367f` --- library 3 performances
  - `0x3f3700` -- `0x3f3b7f` --- library 4 performances
  - `0x3f3c00` -- `0x3f407f` --- library 5 performances
  - `0x3f4100` -- `0x3f457f` --- library 6 performances
  - `0x3f4600` -- `0x3f4a7f` --- library 7 performances
  - `0x3f4b00` -- `0x3f4f7f` --- library 8 performances

The 6-bytes of flags in the entries are allocated as follows:

  - 1 byte motion control flag (`0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set)
  - 1 byte tone generator type (`0x00` = AWM, `0x01` = FMX, `0x02` = AWM+FMX)
  - 1 byte favourite flag (`0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set)
  - 1 byte of attribute bits:
      - `0x01` = SSS is unavailable (more than eight parts)
      - `0x02` = single part performance
      - `0x04` = arpeggiator enabled
      - `0x08` = motion sequencer enabled
      - `0x10` = one or more monophonic parts
      - `0x20`, `0x40`, `0x80` are unused
  - 2 bytes category bitmask

One or more bits are set in the [category bitmask](categories) corresponding
to the categories of parts contained in the performance: `0x0001` = Piano,
`0x0002` = Keyboard, `0x0004` = Organ, etc.

The zero-terminated name string contains the [numeric category and
subcategory](categories) of the first part followed by a ':' and the name of
that part, for example "`66:FM Hybrid Bass`". This is identical to the
_category:name_ string in the performance data for that part.

The zero-terminated title string contains the unprefixed name of the
performance itself, for example "`FM Hybrid Bass`". Both this name and the
part names are sometimes padded to a length of 20 bytes with space
characters `0x20`, but the instrument itself doesn't do this.

These are followed by zero or more 32-bit program numbers of non-preset
waveforms used by the performance.


## Waveforms ("EWFM" and "EWIM")

The are two types of entry list for waveforms. "`EWFM`" and "`DWFM`" blocks
contain the (small) waveform metadata, whereas "`EWIM`" and "`DWIM`" blocks
contain the corresponding (large) wave data itself.

Waveform program numbers have the usual bank number in the most-significant
16-bits, and a number between `0x0001` and `0x0400` in the least significant
16-bits. Waveform `0x0000` is reserved for empty elements, so for example
the first and second user waveforms are `0x00010001` and `0x00010002`.

The six flag bytes are apparently unused apart from byte 3 which contains
the favourite flag: `0x00` = unset, `0x01` = set.

The zero-terminated name string contains the [numeric category and
subcategory](categories) followed by a ':' and the waveform name, for
example "`66:Analog Bass1`".


## System settings ("ESYS")

This list has a single entry numbered `0x00000000` and named "`System`",
containing all the settings.


## Favourites ("EFVT")

The favourite flag in the entry lists is only used to mark favourite
performances, arpeggios and waveforms for user banks. The flags in the
library info area are used to record favourite choices for libraries.

However, users also also need to be able to mark preset items as favourites
without modifying the original so there is yet another ad-hoc mechanism for
this. "`EFVT`" and "`DFVT`" blocks have one entry for each list type, named
"`PerformanceFavorite`", "`ArpeggioFavorite`" and "`WaveformFavorite`"
respectively. The data for these is a block of flag bytes (`0x00` = unset,
`0x01` = set), one for each preset of that type.


## Patterns, pattern chains and songs ("EPAT", "EPCH" and "ESNG")

Songs and patterns are stored globally, not in user or library banks. As a
result, they are only exported in X7A backup files, not X7U user files,
which often catches out users. However, they are numbered as though they
live in the user bank: `0x00010000`, `0x00010001`, etc.


## Contact and credits

Please send any questions, corrections or other contributions to
Chris Webb \<[chris@arachsys.com](mailto:chris@arachsys.com)>.

The library info area was documented in collaboration with Derek Cook of
[x.factory Librarians](http://www.xfactory-librarians.co.uk/) in a [GitHub
discussions thread](https://github.com/arachsys/montage/discussions/5).
